---
title: A Warm Welcome to ASN.1 and DER
slug: a-warm-welcome-to-asn1-and-der
top_graphic: 1
date: 2020-04-23
lastmod: 2020-05-15
---

This document provides a gentle introduction to the data structures and
formats that define the certificates used in HTTPS. It should be
accessible to anyone with a little bit of computer science experience
and a bit of familiarity with certificates.

An HTTPS certificate is a type of file, like any other file. Its
contents follow a format defined by [RFC
5280](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280).
The definitions are expressed in ASN.1, which is a language used to
define file formats or (equivalently) data structures. For instance, in
C you might write:

```c
struct point {
  int x, y;
  char label[10];
};
```

In Go you would write:

```go
type point struct {
  x, y int
  label string
}
```

And in ASN.1 you would write:

```asn1
Point ::= SEQUENCE {
  x INTEGER,
  y INTEGER,
  label UTF8String
}
```

The advantage of writing ASN.1 definitions instead of Go or C
definitions is that they are language-independent. You can implement the
ASN.1 definition of Point in any language, or (preferably) you can use a
tool that takes the ASN.1 definition and automatically generates code
implementing it in your favorite language. A set of ASN.1 definitions is
called a
"[module](https://www.obj-sys.com/asn1tutorial/node6.html)."

The other important thing about ASN.1 is that it comes with a variety of
serialization formats\-- ways to turn an in-memory data structure into a
series of bytes (or a file) and back again. This allows a certificate
generated by one machine to be read by a different machine, even if that
machine is using a different CPU and operating system.

There are some other languages that [do the same
things](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interface_description_language) as
ASN.1. For instance, Protocol Buffers offer both a
[language](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/proto3) for
defining types and a [serialization
format](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/encoding) for
encoding objects of the types you've defined.
[Thrift](https://thrift.apache.org/) also
has both a language and a serialization format. Either Protocol Buffers
or Thrift could have just as easily been used to define the format for
HTTPS certificates, but ASN.1 (1984) had the significant advantage of
already existing when certificates (1988) and HTTPS (1994) were
invented.

ASN.1 has been revised multiple times through the years, with editions
usually identified by the year they were published. This document aims
to teach enough ASN.1 to clearly understand RFC 5280 and other standards
related to HTTPS certificates, so we'll mainly talk about the 1988
edition, with a few notes on features that were added in later editions.
You can download the various editions directly from ITU, with the caveat
that some are only available to ITU members. The relevant
standards are
[X.680](https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-X.680) (defining
the ASN.1 language) and
[X.690](https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-X.690) (defining
the serialization formats DER and BER). Earlier versions of those standards were
[X.208](https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-X.208/en) and
[X.209](https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-X.209/en), respectively.

ASN.1's main serialization format is "Distinguished Encoding Rules"
(DER). They are a variant of "Basic Encoding Rules" (BER) with
canonicalization added. For instance, if a type includes a SET OF, the
members must be sorted for DER serialization.

A certificate represented in DER is often further encoded into PEM,
which uses
[base64](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Base64) to
encode arbitrary bytes as alphanumeric characters (and '+' and '/') and
adds separator lines ("\-\-\-\--BEGIN CERTIFICATE\-\-\-\--" and
"\-\-\-\--END CERTIFICATE\-\-\-\--"). PEM is useful because it's easier
to copy-paste.

This document will first describe the types and notation used by ASN.1,
and will then describe how objects defined using ASN.1 are encoded. Feel
free to flip back and forth between the sections, particularly since
some features of the ASN.1 language directly specify encoding details.
This document prefers more familiar terms, and so uses "byte" in place
of "octet," and "value" in place of "contents." It uses "serialization"
and "encoding" interchangeably.

The Types
=========

INTEGER
-------

Good old familiar INTEGER. These can be positive or negative. What's
really unusual about ASN.1 INTEGERs is that they can be arbitrarily big.
Not enough room in an int64? No problem. This is particularly handy for
representing things like an RSA modulus, which is much bigger than an
int64 (like 2<sup>2048</sup> big). Technically there is a maximum integer in DER
but it's extraordinarily large: The length of any DER field can be
expressed as a series of up to 126 bytes. So the biggest INTEGER you can
represent in DER is 256<sup>(2\*\*1008)</sup>-1. For a truly unbounded INTEGER you'd
have to encode in BER, which allows indefinitely-long fields.

Strings
-------

ASN.1 has a lot of string types: BMPString, GeneralString,
GraphicString, IA5String, ISO646String, NumericString, PrintableString,
TeletexString, T61String, UniversalString, UTF8String, VideotexString,
and VisibleString. For the purposes of HTTPS certificates you mostly
have to care about PrintableString, UTF8String, and
[IA5String](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IA5STRING).
The string type for a given field is defined by the ASN.1 module that
defines the field. [For instance](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280#page-127):

```
CPSuri ::= IA5String
```

PrintableString is a restricted subset of ASCII, allowing alphanumerics,
spaces, and a specific handful of punctuation: `' () + , - . / : = ?`.
Notably it doesn't include `*` or `@`. There are no storage-size
benefits to more restrictive string types.

Some fields, like [DirectoryString in RFC
5280](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280#page-20),
allow the serialization code to choose among multiple string types.
Since DER encoding includes the type of string you're using, make sure
that when you encode something as PrintableString it [really meets the
PrintableString
requirements](https://community.letsencrypt.org/t/2018-03-12-wildcard-certificate-encoding-issue/55485).

IA5String, based on [International Alphabet No.
5](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/T.50_(standard)),
is more permissive: It allows nearly any ASCII character, and is used
for email address, DNS names, and URLs in certificates. Note that there
are a few byte values where the IA5 meaning of the byte value is
different than the US-ASCII meaning of that same value.

TeletexString, BMPString, and UniversalString are deprecated for use in
HTTPS certificates, but you may see them when parsing older CA
certificates, which are long-lived and may predate the deprecation.

Strings in ASN.1 are not null-terminated like strings in C and C++. In
fact, it's perfectly legal to have embedded null bytes. This can cause
vulnerabilities when two systems interpret the same ASN.1 string
differently. For instance, some CAs [used to be able to be tricked into
issuing](https://www.theregister.co.uk/2009/07/30/universal_ssl_certificate/) for
"example.com\\0.evil.com" on the basis of ownership of evil.com.
Certificate validation libraries at the time treated the result as valid
for "example.com". Be very careful handling ASN.1 strings in C and C++
to avoid creating vulnerabilities.

Dates and Times
---------------

Again, lots of time types: UTCTime, GeneralizedTime, DATE, TIME-OF-DAY,
DATE-TIME and DURATION. For HTTPS certificates you only have to care
about UTCTime and GeneralizedTime.

UTCTime represents a date and time as YYMMDDhhmm[ss], with an optional
timezone offset or "Z" to represent Zulu (aka UTC aka 0 timezone
offset). For instance the UTCTimes 820102120000Z and
820102070000-0500 both represent the same time: January 2nd, 1982,
at 7am in New York City (UTC-5) and at 12pm in UTC.

Since UTCTime is ambiguous as to whether it's the 1900's or 2000's, [RFC
5280
clarifies](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280#section-4.1.2.5.1) that
it represents dates from 1950 to 2050. RFC 5280 also requires that the
"Z" timezone must be used and seconds must be included.

GeneralizedTime supports dates after 2050 through the simple expedient
of representing the year with four digits. It also allows fractional
seconds (weirdly, with either a comma or a full stop as the decimal
separator). RFC 5280 forbids fractional seconds and requires the "Z."

OBJECT IDENTIFIER
-----------------

Object identifiers are globally unique, hierarchical identifiers made of
a sequence of integers. They can refer to any kind of "thing," but are
commonly used to identify standards, algorithms, certificate extensions,
organizations, or policy documents. As an example:
[1.2.840.113549](http://oid-info.com/get/1.2.840.113549) identifies
RSA Security LLC. RSA can then assign OIDs starting with that prefix,
like
[1.2.840.113549.1.1.11](http://oid-info.com/get/1.2.840.113549.1.1.11),
which identifies sha256WithRSAEncryption, as defined in [RFC
8017](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8017#page-69).

Similarly,
[1.3.6.1.4.1.11129](http://oid-info.com/get/1.3.6.1.4.1.11129) identifies
Google, Inc. Google assigned
[1.3.6.1.4.1.11129.2.4.2](http://oid-info.com/get/1.3.6.1.4.1.11129.2.4.2) to
identify the [SCT list
extension](https://letsencrypt.org/2018/04/04/sct-encoding.html) used
in Certificate Transparency (which was initially developed at Google),
as defined in [RFC
6962](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6962).

The set of child OIDs that can exist under a given prefix is called an
"OID arc." Since the representation of shorter OIDs is smaller, OID
assignments under shorter arcs are considered more valuable,
particularly for formats where that OID will have to be sent a lot. The
OID arc
[2.5](http://oid-info.com/get/2.5) is
assigned to "Directory Services," the series of specifications that
includes X.509, which HTTPS certificates are based on. A lot of fields
in certificates begin with that conveniently short arc. For instance,
[2.5.4.6](http://oid-info.com/get/2.5.4.6) means
"countryName," while
[2.5.4.10](http://oid-info.com/get/2.5.4.10) means
"organizationName." Since most certificates have to encode each of those
OIDs at least once, it's handy that they are short.

OIDs in specifications are commonly represented with a human-readable
name for convenience, and may be specified by concatenation with another
OID. [For instance from RFC 8017](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8017#page-68):

```asn1
   pkcs-1    OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {
       iso(1) member-body(2) us(840) rsadsi(113549) pkcs(1) 1
   }
   ...

   sha256WithRSAEncryption      OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { pkcs-1 11 }
```

NULL
----

NULL is just NULL, ya know?

SEQUENCE and SEQUENCE OF
------------------------

Don't let the names fool you: These are two very different types. A
SEQUENCE is equivalent to "struct" in most programming languages. It
holds a fixed number of fields of different types. For instance, see the
[Certificate example below](#bit-string-and-octet-string).

A SEQUENCE OF, on the other hand, holds an arbitrary number of fields of
a single type. This is analogous to an array or a list in a programming
language. [For instance](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280#page-116):

```asn1
   RDNSequence ::= SEQUENCE OF RelativeDistinguishedName
```

That could be 0, 1, or 7,000 RelativeDistinguishedNames, in a specific
order.

It turns out SEQUENCE and SEQUENCE OF do have one similarity - they are
both encoded the same way! More on that in the [Encoding](#sequence-encoding) section.

SET and SET OF
--------------

These are pretty much the same as SEQUENCE and SEQUENCE OF, except that
there are intentionally no semantics attached to the ordering of
elements in them. However, in encoded form they must be sorted.
[An example](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280#page-116):

```asn1
RelativeDistinguishedName ::=
  SET SIZE (1..MAX) OF AttributeTypeAndValue
```

Note: This example uses the SIZE keyword to additionally specify that
RelativeDistinguishedName must have at least one member, but in general
a SET or SET OF is allowed to have a size of zero.

BIT STRING and OCTET STRING
---------------------------

These contain arbitrary bits or bytes respectively. These can be used to
hold unstructured data, like nonces or hash function output. They can
also be used like a void pointer in C or the empty interface type
(interface{}) in Go: A way to hold data that does have a structure, but
where that structure is understood or defined separately from the type
system. [For instance](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280#page-116),
the signature on a certificate is defined as a BIT STRING:

```
Certificate  ::=  SEQUENCE  {
     tbsCertificate       TBSCertificate,
     signatureAlgorithm   AlgorithmIdentifier,
     signature            BIT STRING  }
```

Later versions of the ASN.1 language [allow more detailed
specification](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5912#page-99) of
the contents inside the BIT STRING (and the same is true of OCTET
STRINGs).

CHOICE and ANY
--------------

CHOICE is a type that can contain exactly one of the types listed in its
definition. [For instance](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280#page-117),
Time can contain exactly one of a UTCTime or a GeneralizedTime:

```asn1
Time ::= CHOICE {
     utcTime        UTCTime,
     generalTime    GeneralizedTime }
```

ANY indicates that a value can be of any type. In practice, it is
usually constrained by things that can't quite be expressed in the ASN.1
grammar. [For instance](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280#page-111):

```asn1
   AttributeTypeAndValue ::= SEQUENCE {
     type     AttributeType,
     value    AttributeValue }

   AttributeType ::= OBJECT IDENTIFIER

   AttributeValue ::= ANY -- DEFINED BY AttributeType
```

This is particularly useful for extensions, where you want to leave room
for additional fields to be defined separately after the main spec is
published, so you have a way to register new types (object identifiers),
and allow the definitions for those types to specify what the structure
of the new fields should be.

Note that ANY is a relic of the 1988 ASN.1 notation. In [the 1994
edition](https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-X.680-199407-S/en), ANY
was deprecated and replaced with Information Object Classes, which are a
fancy, formalized way of specifying the kind of extension behavior
people wanted from ANY. The change is so old by now that the latest
ASN.1 specs (from 2015) don't even mention ANY. But if you look at the
1994 edition you can see some discussion of the switchover. I include
the older syntax here because that's still what RFC 5280 uses. [RFC
5912](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5912) uses
the 2002 ASN.1 syntax to express the same types from RFC 5280 and
several related specs.

Other Notation
==============

Comments begin with `--`. Fields of a SEQUENCE or SET can be marked
OPTIONAL, or they can be marked DEFAULT foo, which means the same thing
as OPTIONAL except that when the field is absent it should be considered
to contain "foo." Types with a length (strings, octet and bit strings,
sets and sequences OF things) can be given a SIZE parameter that
constrains their length, either to an exact length or to a range.

Types can be constrained to have certain values by using curly braces
after the type definition. [This example
defines](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280#page-117) that the Version field
can have three values, and assigns meaningful names to those values:

```asn1
Version ::= INTEGER { v1(0), v2(1), v3(2) }
```

This is also often used in assigning names to specific OIDs (note this
is a single value, with no commas indicating alternate values). [Example from RFC
5280](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280#page-110).

```asn1
id-pkix  OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::=
         { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
                    security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) }
```

You'll also see \[number\], IMPLICIT, EXPLICIT, UNIVERSAL, and
APPLICATION. These define details of how a value should be encoded,
which we'll talk about below.

The Encoding
============

ASN.1 is associated with many encodings: BER, DER, PER, XER, and
more. Basic Encoding Rules (BER) are fairly flexible. Distinguished
Encoding Rules (DER) are a subset of BER with
[canonicalization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canonicalization) rules
so there is only one way to express a given structure. Packed Encoding
Rules (PER) use fewer bytes to encode things, so they are useful when
space or transmission time is at a premium. XML Encoding Rules (XER) are
useful when for some reason you want to use XML.

HTTPS certificates are generally encoded in DER. It's possible to encode
them in BER, but since the signature value is calculated over the
equivalent DER encoding, not the exact bytes in the certificate,
encoding a certificate in BER invites unnecessary trouble. I'll describe
BER, and explain as I go the additional restrictions provided by DER.

I encourage you to read this section with this [decoding of a real
certificate](https://lapo.it/asn1js/#MIIFaTCCBFGgAwIBAgISA9QVMY4sVx0pBfw-BSdonQ0JMA0GCSqGSIb3DQEBCwUAMEoxCzAJBgNVBAYTAlVTMRYwFAYDVQQKEw1MZXQncyBFbmNyeXB0MSMwIQYDVQQDExpMZXQncyBFbmNyeXB0IEF1dGhvcml0eSBYMzAeFw0xOTA5MjkxNjMzMzZaFw0xOTEyMjgxNjMzMzZaMBoxGDAWBgNVBAMTD2xldHNlbmNyeXB0Lm9yZzCCASIwDQYJKoZIhvcNAQEBBQADggEPADCCAQoCggEBANACdZdYiHLXjUhzqmaHENZ_mYp05-bbJw0RhmkCMN32iqPP0_2_KBRi60F87-itSNcKpQ_HQmEm5NoaH6rHzPuihv834og9TPsHeM0QOkaGOcR001h0kGRlIgynXzG7kSO7hTAUSbLfzCD4Hp8swLJHCz787sn_09DvPkJdeHhlQvrgfnGXqsHLqSXo9UtZXriwYS0HRCt5dKCLTOQAmS5ezKG2-7LVcuQQGsG1st3f2t092zJ8BDj_hAd0Zh8vKRwkDZvPzZzo76g4pGtVPRhmcDnVLin4PmsysWevEdzpJhNO7FXCsCA2aWo4ePAYKrR9BjyNlPAQ2QkKlI_cJx8CAwEAAaOCAncwggJzMA4GA1UdDwEB_wQEAwIFoDAdBgNVHSUEFjAUBggrBgEFBQcDAQYIKwYBBQUHAwIwDAYDVR0TAQH_BAIwADAdBgNVHQ4EFgQUfCuj5zyEXzjUdndlK8VKWGyO3aowHwYDVR0jBBgwFoAUqEpqYwR93brm0Tm3pkVl7_Oo7KEwbwYIKwYBBQUHAQEEYzBhMC4GCCsGAQUFBzABhiJodHRwOi8vb2NzcC5pbnQteDMubGV0c2VuY3J5cHQub3JnMC8GCCsGAQUFBzAChiNodHRwOi8vY2VydC5pbnQteDMubGV0c2VuY3J5cHQub3JnLzAvBgNVHREEKDAmgg9sZXRzZW5jcnlwdC5vcmeCE3d3dy5sZXRzZW5jcnlwdC5vcmcwTAYDVR0gBEUwQzAIBgZngQwBAgEwNwYLKwYBBAGC3xMBAQEwKDAmBggrBgEFBQcCARYaaHR0cDovL2Nwcy5sZXRzZW5jcnlwdC5vcmcwggECBgorBgEEAdZ5AgQCBIHzBIHwAO4AdQDiaUuuJujpQAnohhu2O4PUPuf-dIj7pI8okwGd3fHb_gAAAW1-FbruAAAEAwBGMEQCIBROHx_dL0yfOpZs7Y6teawOn0oawhuW-3lvVs61DhjcAiB2ZuYwHu3BwYtqJTqfwsjQzjMZm8bQOutdme7dfaLXvgB1ACk8UZZUyDlluqpQ_FgH1Ldvv1h6KXLcpMMM9OVFR_R4AAABbX4VuuYAAAQDAEYwRAIgTc8_QJi4odfZIQ1u74zzvkBobqa08Wb_vxoqlgviUYICIGnAFgaPUg-xzKTRZGTGO4cj8UGJ3f52NoD6UWipPgIvMA0GCSqGSIb3DQEBCwUAA4IBAQAWl67Avp7BgqZW3VEWEjXHganloM8OHMS6en6S46nyuW0itGzth8SmCuG4i7fseecEG3Zsm0U1S1d3AffClOwWAGxB5Ark8Bpjszy8nGtNo7pFH-psGCBGj1pnklteu3jUzkkXKHS00Dsna1fJIzswgD7X7et8PRvV3ufIidkvvbfev0L2TYPWEFMM7WO0eIysf9WTljuflgcbzJXY0PatUBzL59ekidJZvGZ7d-hTl14CcCTrZ-VGMZlmK6tMhBuXJdAa5R0QSUpqirGRLz37Ox-SVh_tjA-I2tcRs0euAoX0etcr5cbBapV4-6LtSUt_rLBddeXCnDxqAWQxyy0p) open
in another window.

Type-Length-Value
-----------------

BER is a type-length-value encoding, just like Protocol Buffers and
Thrift. That means that, as you read bytes that are encoded with BER,
first you encounter a type, called in ASN.1 a tag. This is a byte, or
series of bytes, that tells you what type of thing is encoded: an
INTEGER, or a UTF8String, or a structure, or whatever else.

| type | length | value    |
|------|--------|----------|
| 02   | 03     | 01 00 01 |

Next you encounter a length: a number that tells you how many
bytes of data you're going to need to read in order to get the value.
Then, of course, comes the bytes containing the value itself. As an
example, the hex bytes 02 03 01 00 01 would represent an INTEGER (tag 02
corresponds to the INTEGER type), with length 03, and a three-byte
value consisting of 01 00 01.

Type-length-value is distinguished from delimited encodings like JSON,
CSV, or XML, where instead of knowing the length of a field up front,
you read bytes until you hit the expected delimiter (e.g. `}` in JSON,
or `</some-tag>` in XML).

Tag
---

The tag is usually one byte. There is a means to encode arbitrarily
large tag numbers using multiple bytes (the "high tag number" form), but
this is not typically necessary.

Here are some example tags:

<style>
td {
  padding: 0.2em 1em;
  border: 2px solid lightgrey;
}
table {
  margin-left: 1em;
  margin-bottom: 0.5em;
}
</style>

| Tag (decimal)         | Tag (hex)             | Type                  |
| ---------------------:| ---------------------:| --------------------- |
| 2                     | 02                    | INTEGER               |
| 3                     | 03                    | BIT STRING            |
| 4                     | 04                    | OCTET STRING          |
| 5                     | 05                    | NULL                  |
| 6                     | 06                    | OBJECT IDENTIFIER     |
| 12                    | 0C                    | UTF8String            |
| 16                    | 10 (and 30)\*         | SEQUENCE and SEQUENCE OF |
| 17                    | 11 (and 31)\*         | SET and SET OF        |
| 19                    | 13                    | PrintableString       |
| 22                    | 16                    | IA5String             |
| 23                    | 17                    | UTCTime               |
| 24                    | 18                    | GeneralizedTime       |

These, and a few others I've skipped for being boring, are the
"universal" tags, because they are specified in the core ASN.1 spec and
mean the same thing across all ASN.1 modules.

These tags all happen to be under 31, and that's for a good reason: Bits
8, 7, and 6 (the high bits of the tag byte) are used to encode extra
information, so any universal tag numbers higher than 31 would need to
use the "high tag number" form, which takes extra bytes. There are a
small handful of universal tags higher than 31, but they're quite rare.

The two tags marked with a `*` are always encoded as 0x30 or 0x31,
because bit 6 is used to indicate whether a field is Constructed vs
Primitive. These tags are always Constructed, so their encoding has bit
6 set to 1. See the [Constructed vs Primitive](#constructed-vs-primitive) section for details.

Tag Classes
-----------

Just because the universal class has used up all the "good" tag numbers,
that doesn't mean we're out of luck for defining our own tags. There are
also the "application," "private", and "context-specific" classes. These
are distinguished by bits 8 and 7:

| Class                 | Bit 8                 | Bit 7                 |
| --------------------- | ---------------------:| ---------------------:|
| Universal             | 0                     | 0                     |
| Application           | 0                     | 1                     |
| Context-specific      | 1                     | 0                     |
| Private               | 1                     | 1                     |

Specs mostly use tags in the universal class, since they provide the
most important building blocks. For instance, the serial number in a
certificate is encoded in a plain ol' INTEGER, tag number 0x02. But
sometimes a spec needs to define tags in the context-specific class to
disambiguate entries in a SET or SEQUENCE that defines optional entries,
or to disambiguate a CHOICE with multiple entries that have the same
type. For instance, take this definition:

```asn1
Point ::= SEQUENCE {
  x INTEGER OPTIONAL,
  y INTEGER OPTIONAL
}
```

Since OPTIONAL fields are omitted entirely from the encoding when
they're not present, it would be impossible to distinguish a Point with
only an x coordinate from a Point with only a y coordinate. For instance
you'd encode a Point with only an x coordinate of 9 like so (30 means
SEQUENCE here):

```der
30 03 02 01 09
```

That's a SEQUENCE of length 3 (bytes), containing an INTEGER of length
1, which has the value 9. But you'd also encode a Point with a y
coordinate of 9 exactly the same way, so there is ambiguity.

Encoding Instructions
---------------------

To resolve this ambiguity, a spec needs to provide encoding instructions that assign
a unique tag to each entry. And because we're not allowed to stomp on
the UNIVERSAL tags, we have to use one of the others, for instance
APPLICATION:

```asn1
Point ::= SEQUENCE {
  x [APPLICATION 0] INTEGER OPTIONAL,
  y [APPLICATION 1] INTEGER OPTIONAL
}
```

Though for this use case, it's actually much more common to use the
context-specific class, which is represented by a number in brackets by
itself:

```asn1
Point ::= SEQUENCE {
  x [0] INTEGER OPTIONAL,
  y [1] INTEGER OPTIONAL
}
```

So now, to encode a Point with just an x coordinate of 9, instead of
encoding x as a UNIVERSAL INTEGER, you'd sets bit 8 and 7 of the encoded
tag to (1, 0) to indicate the context specific class, and set the low
bits to 0, giving this encoding:

```der
30 03 80 01 09
```

And to represent a Point with just a y coordinate of 9, you'd do the
same thing, except you'd set the low bits to 1:

```der
30 03 81 01 09
```

Or you could represent a Point with x and y coordinate both equal to 9:

```der
30 06 80 01 09 81 01 09
```

Length
------

The length in the tag-length-value tuple always represents the total
number of bytes in the object including all sub-objects. So a SEQUENCE
with one field doesn't have a length of 1; it has a length of however
many bytes the encoded form of that field take up.

The encoding of length can take two forms: short or long. The short form
is a single byte, between 0 and 127.

The long form is at least two bytes
long, and has bit 8 of the first byte set to 1. Bits 7-1 of the first
byte indicate how many more bytes are in the length field itself. Then
the remaining bytes specify the length itself, as a multi-byte integer.

As you can imagine, this allows very long values. The longest possible
length would start with the byte 254 (a length byte of 255 is reserved
for future extensions), specifying that 126 more bytes would follow in
the length field alone. If each of those 126 bytes was 255, that
would indicate 2<sup>1008</sup>-1 bytes to follow in the value field.

The long form allows you to encode the same length multiple ways - for
instance by using two bytes to express a length that could fit in one,
or by using long form to express a length that could fit in the short
form. DER says to always use the smallest possible length
representation.

Safety warning: Don't fully trust the length values that you decode! For
instance, check that the encoded length is less than the amount of data
available from the stream being decoded.

Indefinite length
-----------------

It's also possible, in BER, to encode a string, SEQUENCE, SEQUENCE OF,
SET, or SET OF where you don't know the length in advance (for instance
when streaming output). To do this, you encode the length as a single
byte with the value 80, and encode the value as a series of encoded objects
concatenated together, with the end indicated by the two bytes `00 00`
(which can be considered as a zero-length object with tag 0). So, for
instance, the indefinite length encoding of a UTF8String would be the
encoding of one or more UTF8Strings concatenated together, and
concatenated finally with 00 00.

Indefinite-ness can be arbitrarily nested! So, for example, the
UTF8Strings that you concatenate together to form an indefinite-length
UTF8String and themselves be encoded either with definite length or
indefinite length.

A length byte of 80 is distinguishing because it's not a valid short
form or long form length. Since bit 8 is set to 1, this would normally
be interpreted as the long form, but the remaining bits are supposed to
indicate the number of additional bytes that make up the length. Since
bits 7-1 are all 0, that would indicate a long-form encoding with zero
bytes making up the length, which is not allowed.

DER forbids indefinite length encoding. You must use the definite length
encoding (that is, with the length specified at the beginning).

Constructed vs Primitive
------------------------

Bit 6 of the first tag byte is used to indicate whether the value is
encoded in primitive form or constructed form. Primitive encoding
represents the value directly - for instance, in a UTF8String the value
would consist solely of the string itself, in UTF-8 bytes. Constructed
encoding represents the value as a concatenation of other encoded
values. For instance, as described in the "Indefinite length" section, a
UTF8String in constructed encoding would consist of multiple encoded
UTF8Strings (each with a tag and length), concatenated together. The
length of the overall UTF8String would be the total length, in bytes, of
all those concatenated encoded values.

INTEGER, OBJECT IDENTIFIER, and NULL must use primitive encoding.
SEQUENCE, SEQUENCE OF, SET, and SET OF must use constructed encoding
(because they are inherently concatenations of multiple values).
BIT STRING, OCTET STRING, UTCTime and GeneralizedTime, and the various
string types can use either primitive encoding or constructed encoding,
at the sender's discretion\-- in BER. However, in DER all types that have an
encoding choice between primitive and constructed must use the primitive
encoding.

EXPLICIT vs IMPLICIT
--------------------

The [encoding instructions](#encoding-instructions) described above, e.g. `[1]`, or
`[APPLICATION 8]`, can also include the keyword EXPLICIT or IMPLICIT ([example
from RFC 5280](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280#page-117)):

```asn1
TBSCertificate  ::=  SEQUENCE  {
     version         [0]  Version DEFAULT v1,
     serialNumber         CertificateSerialNumber,
     signature            AlgorithmIdentifier,
     issuer               Name,
     validity             Validity,
     subject              Name,
     subjectPublicKeyInfo SubjectPublicKeyInfo,
     issuerUniqueID  [1]  IMPLICIT UniqueIdentifier OPTIONAL,
                          -- If present, version MUST be v2 or v3
     subjectUniqueID [2]  IMPLICIT UniqueIdentifier OPTIONAL,
                          -- If present, version MUST be v2 or v3
     extensions      [3]  Extensions OPTIONAL
                          -- If present, version MUST be v3 --  }
```

This defines how the tag should be encoded; it doesn't have to do with
whether the tag number is explicitly assigned or not (since both
IMPLICIT and EXPLICIT always go alongside a specific tag number).
IMPLICIT encodes the field just like the underlying type, but with the
tag number and class provided in the ASN.1 module. EXPLICIT encodes the
field as the underlying type, and then wraps that in an outer encoding.
The outer encoding has the tag number and class from the ASN.1 module and
additionally has the Constructed bit set.

Here's an example ASN.1 encoding instruction using IMPLICIT:

```asn1
[5] IMPLICIT UTF8String
```

This would encode "hi" as:

```der
85 02 68 69
```

Compare to this ASN.1 encoding instruction using EXPLICIT:

```asn1
[5] EXPLICIT UTF8String
```

This would encode "hi" as:

```der
A5 04 0C 02 68 69
```

When the IMPLICIT or EXPLICIT keyword is not present, the default is
EXPLICIT, unless the module sets a different default at the top with
"EXPLICIT TAGS," "IMPLICIT TAGS," or "AUTOMATIC TAGS." For instance,
RFC 5280 defines two modules, one where [EXPLICIT tags are the
default](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280#appendix-A.1),
and a second one that imports the first, and has [IMPLICIT tags as the
default](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280#appendix-A.2).
Implicit encoding uses fewer bytes than explicit encoding.

AUTOMATIC TAGS is the same as IMPLICIT TAGS, but with additional
property that tag numbers (`[0]`, `[1]`, etc) are automatically assigned
in places that need them, like SEQUENCEs with optional fields.

Encoding of specific types
==========================

In this section we'll talk about how the value of each type is encoded,
with examples.

INTEGER encoding
----------------

Integers are encoded as one or more bytes, in two's complement with the
high bit (bit 8) of the leftmost byte as the sign bit. As the BER spec
says:

The value of a two\'s complement binary number is derived by numbering
the bits in the contents octets, starting with bit 1 of the last octet
as bit zero and ending the numbering with bit 8 of the first octet. Each
bit is assigned a numerical value of 2<sup>N</sup>, where N is its position in the
above numbering sequence. The value of the two\'s complement binary
number is obtained by summing the numerical values assigned to each bit
for those bits which are set to one, excluding bit 8 of the first octet,
and then reducing this value by the numerical value assigned to bit 8 of
the first octet if that bit is set to one.

So for instance this one-byte value (represented in binary) encodes
decimal 50:

00110010 (== decimal 50)

This one-byte value (represented in binary) encodes decimal -100:

10011100 (== decimal -100)

This five-bytes value (represented in binary) encodes decimal
-549755813887 (i.e. -2<sup>39</sup> + 1):

10000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000001 (== decimal -549755813887)

BER and DER both require that integers be represented in the shortest
form possible. That is enforced with this rule:

```
... the bits of the first octet and bit 8 of the second octet:

1.  shall not all be ones; and
2.  shall not all be zero.
```

Rule (2) roughly means: if there are leading zero bytes in the encoding
you could just as well leave them off and have the same number. Bit 8 of
the second byte is important here too because if you want to represent
certain values, you must use a leading zero byte. For instance, decimal
255 is encoded as two bytes:

00000000 11111111

That's because a single-byte encoding of 11111111 by itself means -1
(bit 8 is treated as the sign bit).

Rule (1) is best explained with an example. Decimal -128 is encoded as:

10000000 (== decimal -128)

However, that could also be encoded as:

11111111 10000000 (== decimal -128, but an invalid encoding)

Expanding that out, it's -2<sup>15</sup> + 2<sup>14</sup> + 2<sup>13</sup> + 2<sup>12</sup> + 2<sup>11</sup> + 2<sup>10</sup> + 2<sup>9</sup> + 2<sup>8</sup> + 2<sup>7</sup> == -2<sup>7</sup> == -128. Note that the 1 in "10000000" was a sign bit in the
single-byte encoding, but means 27 in the two-byte encoding.

This is a generic transform: For any negative number encoded as BER (or
DER) you could prefix it with 11111111 and get the same number. This is called
[sign extension](https://andybargh.com/binary-sign-extension/). Or
equivalently, if there's a negative number where the encoding of the
value begins with 11111111, you could remove that byte and still have
the same number. So BER and DER require the shortest encoding.

The two's complement encoding of INTEGERs has [practical impact in
certificate
issuance](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/mozilla.dev.security.policy/nnLVNfqgz7g%255B26-50%255D):
RFC 5280 requires that serial numbers be positive. Since the first bit
is always a sign bit, that means serial numbers encoded in DER as 8 bytes can
be at most 63 bits long. Encoding a 64-bit positive serial number
requires a 9-byte encoded value (with the first byte being zero).

Here's the encoding of an INTEGER with the value 2<sup>63</sup>+1 (which happens to
be a 64-bit positive number):

```der
02 09 00 80 00 00 00 00 00 00 01
```

String encoding
---------------

Strings are encoded as their literal bytes. Since IA5String and
PrintableString just define different subsets of acceptable characters,
their encodings differ only by tag.

A PrintableString containing "hi":

```der
13 02 68 69
```

An IA5String containing "hi":

```der
16 02 68 69
```

UTF8Strings are the same, but can encode a wider variety of characters.
For instance, this is the encoding of a UTF8String containing U+1F60E
Smiling Face With Sunglasses (😎):

```der
0c 04 f0 9f 98 8e
```

Date and Time encoding
----------------------

UTCTime and GeneralizedTime are actually encoded like strings,
surprisingly! As described above in the "Types" section, UTCTime
represents dates in the format YYMMDDhhmmss. GeneralizedTime uses a
four-digit year YYYY in place of YY. Both have an optional timezone offset or
"Z" (Zulu) to indicate no timezone offset from UTC.

For instance, December 15, 2019 at 19:02:10 in the PST time zone (UTC-8)
is represented in a UTCTime as: 191215190210-0800. Encoded in BER,
that's:

```der
17 11 31 39 31 32 31 35 31 39 30 32 31 30 2d 30 38 30 30
```

For BER encoding, seconds are optional in both UTCTime and GeneralizedTime, and
timezone offsets are allowed. However, DER (along with RFC 5280) specify that
seconds must be present, fractional seconds must not be present, and the time must
be expressed as UTC with the "Z" form.

The above date would be encoded in DER as:

```der
17 0d 31 39 31 32 31 36 30 33 30 32 31 30 5a
```

OBJECT IDENTIFIER encoding
--------------------------

As [described above](#object-identifier), OIDs are conceptually a series of integers.
They are always at
least two components long. The first component is always 0, 1, or 2.
When the first component is 0 or 1, the second component is always less
than 40. Because of this, the first two components are unambiguously
represented as 40\*X+Y, where X is the first component and Y is the
second.

So, for instance, to encode 2.999.3, you would combine the first two
components into 1079 decimal (40\*2 + 999), which would give you
"1079.3".

After applying that transform, each component is encoded in base 128,
with the most significant byte first. Bit 8 is set to "1" in every byte
except the last in a component; that's how you know when one component
is done and the next one begins. So the component "3" would be
represented simply as the byte 0x03. The component "129" would be
represented as the bytes 0x81 0x01. Once encoded, all the components of
an OID are concatenated together to form the encoded value of the OID.

OIDs must be represented in the fewest bytes possible, whether in BER or
DER. So components cannot begin with the byte 0x80.

As an example, the OID 1.2.840.113549.1.1.11 (representing
[sha256WithRSAEncryption](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8017#appendix-A.2.4))
is encoded like so:

```der
06 09 2a 86 48 86 f7 0d 01 01 0b
```

NULL encoding
-------------

The value of an object containing NULL is always zero-length, so the
encoding of NULL is always just the tag and a length field of zero:

```der
05 00
```

SEQUENCE encoding
-----------------

The first thing to know about SEQUENCE is that it always uses
Constructed encoding because it
contains other objects. In other words,
the value bytes of a SEQUENCE contain the concatenation of the encoded
fields of that SEQUENCE (in the order those fields were defined). This
also means that bit 6 of a SEQUENCE's tag (the [Constructed vs
Primitive](#constructed-vs-primitive) bit) is always set to 1. So even
though the tag number for SEQUENCE is technically 0x10, its tag byte,
once encoded, is always 0x30.

When there are fields in a SEQUENCE with the OPTIONAL annotation,
they are simply omitted from the encoding if not present. As a decoder
processes elements of the SEQUENCE, it can figure out which type is
being decoded based on what's been decoded so far, and the tag bytes it
reads. If there is ambiguity, for instance when elements have the same
type, the ASN.1 module must specify [encoding
instructions](#encoding-instructions) that assign
distinct tag numbers to the elements.

DEFAULT fields are similar to OPTIONAL ones. If a field's value is the
default, it may be omitted from the BER encoding. In the DER encoding, it
MUST be omitted.

As an example, RFC 5280 [defines
AlgorithmIdentifier](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280#page-118) as a SEQUENCE:

```asn1
   AlgorithmIdentifier  ::=  SEQUENCE  {
        algorithm               OBJECT IDENTIFIER,
        parameters              ANY DEFINED BY algorithm OPTIONAL  }
```

Here's the encoding of the AlgorithmIdentifier containing
1.2.840.113549.1.1.11. RFC 8017 says ["parameters" should have the type
NULL for this
algorithm](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8017#appendix-A.2).

```der
30 0d 06 09 2a 86 48 86 f7 0d 01 01 0b 05 00
```

SEQUENCE OF encoding
--------------------

A SEQUENCE OF is encoded in exactly the same way as a SEQUENCE. It even
uses the same tag! If you're decoding, the only way you can tell the
difference between a SEQUENCE and a SEQUENCE OF is by reference to the
ASN.1 module.

Here is the encoding of a SEQUENCE OF INTEGER containing the numbers 7,
8, and 9:

```der
30 09 02 01 07 02 01 08 02 01 09
```

SET encoding
------------

Like SEQUENCE, a SET is Contructed, meaning that its value bytes are the
concatenation of its encoded fields. Its tag number is 0x11. Since the
[Constructed vs Primitive](#constructed-vs-primitive) bit (bit 6) is
always set to 1, that means it's encoded with a tag byte of 0x31.

The encoding of a SET, like a SEQUENCE, omits OPTIONAL and DEFAULT fields
if they are absent or have the default value. Any ambiguity that results due to
fields with the same type must be resolved by the ASN.1 module, and
DEFAULT fields MUST be omitted from DER encoding if they have the
default value.

In BER, a SET may be encoded in any order. In DER, a SET must be encoded
in ascending order by tag.

SET OF encoding
---------------

A SET OF items is encoded the same way as a SET, including the tag byte
of 0x31. For DER encoding, there is a similar requirement that the SET OF
must be encoded in ascending order. Because all elements in the SET OF
have the same type, ordering by tag is not sufficient. So the elements
of a SET OF are sorted by their encoded values, with shorter values
treated as if they were padded to the right with zeroes.

BIT STRING encoding
-------------------

A BIT STRING of N bits is encoded as N/8 bytes (rounded up), with a
one-byte prefix that contains the "number of unused bits," for clarity
when the number of bits is not a multiple of 8. For instance, when
encoding the bit string 011011100101110111 (18 bits), we need at least 3
bytes. But that's somewhat more than we need: it gives us capacity for
24 bits total. Six of those bits will be unused. Those six bits are
written at the rightmost end of the bit string, so this is encoded as:

```der
03 04 06 6e 5d c0
```

In BER, the unused bits can have any value, so the last byte of that
encoding could just as well be c1, c2, c3, and so on. In DER, the unused
bits must all be zero.

OCTET STRING encoding
---------------------

An OCTET STRING is encoded as the bytes it contains. Here's an example
of an OCTET STRING containing the bytes 03, 02, 06, and A0:

```der
04 04 03 02 06 A0
```

CHOICE and ANY encoding
-----------------------

A CHOICE or ANY field is encoded as whatever type it actually holds,
unless modified by encoding instructions. So if a CHOICE field in an
ASN.1 spec allows an INTEGER or a UTCTime, and the specific object being
encoded contains an INTEGER, then it is encoded as an INTEGER.

In practice, CHOICE fields very often have encoding instructions. For
instance, consider this example from RFC 5280, where the encoding
instructions are necessary to distinguish rfc822Name from dNSName, since
they both have the underlying type IA5String:

```
   GeneralName ::= CHOICE {
        otherName                       [0]     OtherName,
        rfc822Name                      [1]     IA5String,
        dNSName                         [2]     IA5String,
        x400Address                     [3]     ORAddress,
        directoryName                   [4]     Name,
        ediPartyName                    [5]     EDIPartyName,
        uniformResourceIdentifier       [6]     IA5String,
        iPAddress                       [7]     OCTET STRING,
        registeredID                    [8]     OBJECT IDENTIFIER }
```

Here's an example encoding of a GeneralName containing the rfc822Name
`a@example.com` (recalling that \[1\] means to use tag number 1, in
the tag class "context-specific" (bit 8 set to 1), with the IMPLICIT tag
encoding method):

```der
81 0d 61 40 65 78 61 6d 70 6c 65 2e 63 6f 6d
```

Here's an example encoding of a GeneralName containing the dNSName
"example.com":

```der
82 0b 65 78 61 6d 70 6c 65 2e 63 6f 6d
```

Safety
======

It's important to be very careful decoding BER and DER, particularly in
non-memory-safe languages like C and C++. There's a long history of
vulnerabilities in decoders. Parsing input in general is a [common
source of
vulnerabilities](http://langsec.org/).
The ASN.1 encoding formats in particular seem to be [particular
vulnerability
magnets](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1300257).
They are complicated formats, with many variable-length fields. Even the
lengths have variable lengths! Also, ASN.1 input is often
attacker-controlled. If you have to parse a certificate in order to
distinguish an authorized user from an unauthorized one, you have to
assume that some of the time you will be parsing, not a certificate, but
some bizarre input crafted to exploit bugs in your ASN.1 code.

To avoid these problems, it is best to use a memory-safe language
whenever possible. And whether you can use a memory-safe language or
not, it's best to use an [ASN.1
compiler](https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/asn1/Pages/Tools.aspx) to
generate your parsing code rather than writing it from scratch.

Acknowledgements
================

I owe a significant debt to [A Layman's Guide to a Subset of ASN.1, DER,
and
BER](http://luca.ntop.org/Teaching/Appunti/asn1.html),
which is a big part of how I learned these topics. I'd also like to
thank the authors of [A warm welcome to
DNS](https://powerdns.org/hello-dns/),
which is a great read and inspired the tone of this document.

A Little Bonus
==============

Have you ever noticed that a PEM-encoded certificate always starts with
"MII"? For instance:

```
-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----

MIIFajCCBFKgAwIBAgISA6HJW9qjaoJoMn8iU8vTuiQ2MA0GCSqGSIb3DQEBCwUA
...
```

Now you know enough to explain why! A [Certificate is a
SEQUENCE](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280#page-116),
so it will start with the byte 0x30. The next bytes are the [length
field](#length). Certificates are almost always more than 127 bytes, so the length
field has to use the long form of the length. That means the first byte
will be 0x80 + N, where N is the number of length bytes to follow. N is
almost always 2, since that's how many bytes it takes to encode lengths
from 128 to 65535, and almost all certificates have lengths in that
range.

So now we know that the first two bytes of the DER encoding of a
certificate are 0x30 0x82. [PEM
encoding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Privacy-Enhanced_Mail) uses
[base64](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Base64),
which encodes 3 bytes of binary input into 4 ASCII characters of output.
Or, to put it differently: base64 turns 24 bits of binary input into 4
ASCII characters of output, with 6 bits of the input assigned to each
character. We know what the first 16 bits of every certificate will be.
To prove that the first characters of (almost) every certificate will be
"MII", we need two to look at the next 2 bits. Those will be the most
significant bits of the most significant byte of the two length bytes.
Will those bits ever be set to 1? Not unless the certificate is more
than 16,383 bytes long! So we can predict that the first characters of a
PEM certificate will always be the same. Try it yourself:

```
xxd -r -p <<<308200 | base64
```
